(Original Speech)

Firstly, say that it is a great honor for me to be here and I want to thank you for inviting me to this Caribbean Community Summit, and this is also very special because it is the first time to this in my second term as President of Chile.

Regional integration is one of our main foreign policies and interests, and I am fully convinced that is also an aim that we assumed with CARICOM Community, because we play a key role in pushing forward this integration, and we are sure that progressive integration and cooperation, particularly this time where free trade is being tripped and protectionism is a feeling in many different areas, to protect and defend integration and free trade is something that we will work for the best benefits of both the CARICOM countries and all the countries in the world.
 
My presence here also reflects that Chile and CARICOM long- standing relations, which were established with the sign of the Agreement of Scientific-technical Cooperation in 1996, as you remember that, which has taken the way for our cooperation.
 
This something that we need to push forward and strengthen, because it will work in the best interest of the CARICOM and Chile, and also Chile is part of the Pacific Alliance in some aspect is the opportunity to strengthen to the ties between the Pacific Alliance and CARICOM Community.
 
CARICOM and Chile share a common desire for the promotion and of course the political, trade, economic, scientific, technical and culture cooperation, for strengthening relationships and improve the quality of life of our citizens.
 
This is quite evidence at the multilateral level, where both CARICOM and our country share the desire to strengthen the multilateral system and preserve global stability, based on respect for international law. That principle allows us to work towards a great understanding for improvement of regional integration.
 
The presence of Chile in the Caribbean has been strengthened in recent years. We have opened embassies in Jamaica, Trinidad & Tobago and more recently in Guyana, hosted of the General Secretariat of the Caribbean Community, CARICOM. And these embassies have presences in many other countries of this region.
 
And for this reason, we believe that the importance and future of CARICOM as an instrument of peace, stability and development is absolutely key. Being here today, at this meeting, is a clear indication of Chile’s interest on working together and to join efforts in the support of CARICOM in the road ahead.
 
We want to continue working along with you in this attempt of these goals and objectives, and in promoting regional economic integration. We believe that we are doing so, we will be creating an environment for the promotion of regional and international peace and security, which is shared by the Caribbean Community and my country.
 
In this long-term commitment, we have established in 2015, a cooperation program and by being here we affirmed Chile’s commitment to keep pushing that cooperation program and strengthen that program in order to achieve higher and more ambitious goals. 
 
The program is structured with different strategies, combining regional implementation approach, including all income countries and a bilateral approach taking into account the particular requirements of each country.  
 
It has two basic components: technical transfers and training of human resources and includes four thematic areas: social development, agriculture and food security, disaster prevention, where as you said we have a long, long history and experience, and therefore I think that we can learn from each other a lot on how to address this new trend that we have to face particularly what it happened last year in this area with the hurricane season, which was probably the worst one in the history of this area. 
 
One of these strategies have implemented the technical transfer component, which currently execute around a hundred initiatives with de Caribbean countries. 
 
The aim is to share experiences with public officers for the creation of power policy and gradually we have incorporated new actors, from civil society and the academia. The Chilean funds have a line to finance this society initiative.
Our desire is to bring efforts our commitment with CARICOM. This is why Chile would like to work with the Secretariat and its technical advisers and institutions, to have an evaluation of our cooperation and activity, implemented today in order to be able according to what is really needed to improve and to reorient that collaboration program. 
 
This would be the first step in our joint work for our third CARICOM-Chile Joint Commission, and the launch of a new agenda for cooperation based on programs on specific area, which we have discussed this morning in bilateral meetings with many Prime Ministers of countries that belongs to the CARICOM Community.
 
In that aspect, our meetings with the Secretariat and the institutions of CARICOM will be extremely helpful in order to be able to keep moving forward in this area.
 
To other topics that of course will continues in our cooperation agenda, an environmental and natural disasters. We talked this morning with many of the eastern islands of this community, about what it could be helped given what we are expecting for this new hurricane seasons. Particularly, transportation and also infrastructure repair-ment teams is probably one of the things which will be most necessary in this season, and we are working in order to be a better help in that area.
 
We are also facing the negative effects of climate change. We are fully aware that you have a very little responsibility on what it is happening with the climate change in the world. Unfortunately, you are taking a huge piece of the hurt and the consequences of climate change. And that is something which calls for the solidarity from every country, because this is a world problem, and therefore we have to face it in a very solidarity way.  
 
For that reason, the volcanic eruptions at our marine and Antarctic positions has taught us about the nature of natural disasters and how to face them in the best possible way.
 
And we would like of course to be part of the effort that the CARICOM Community, we have to face it this season and the future.
 
From that point of view, that is also why we have launched the Second Because of the Ocean Declaration, which called to all governments to include the oceans in the National Determined Contributions, and I would like to invite to the CARICOM countries to participate in this important initiative which will or could be an extreme help in order to face the challenges of the future.
 
We are also aware on how difficult it is for some small insular countries and middle-income countries, especially in this subject, so we aspire the cooperation program will contribute with some help in terms of financial resources to be able to mitigate or anticipate part of this problem.
 
The contribution can be or will be administered by the capital funds of the OCS and it will include a lot of different areas which have been talking in our discussion with the different countries that belongs to the CARICOM.  
 
Now I would like to talk about a different topic. We have a common concern for the impact of the current economic development at the international level, at the negative effects of the permanent financing market crisis and have had a tremendous impact for small and middle income-country.
 
That’s why this is another reason that we should join our efforts in order to able to face the new challenges in a better way.
 
On the other hand, the rise of the protectionism and the so-called antiglobalization are current challenges for trade, but it is why we don’t have to face by ourselves.
 
Chile has a history of being a very open economy, and we strongly believe that free trade is the best way to achieve the development at least for a country like Chile.
 
A sign of this until now we have free trade agreements with more seventy countries in the world, and we would like to be able to start the negotiations to have a free trade agreement with the CARICOM Community, which is something that we have been looking forward for a long period of time.
 
A sign of our fight against protectionism is that in march we signed the comprehensive and progressive agreement for Transpacific Partnership, that will create the free trade agreement, the free trade zone from Asia to America crossing the Pacific Ocean.
 
And other example of our work is the Pacific Alliance, which we have begun a commitment that absolutely ready to work and establish closer ties with CARICOM.

Going back to CARICOM, with the aim of building capacity in the area of trade policies and trade promotion, and under the framework of the Memorandum of Understanding between ProChile and Jampro, both countries will organize an annual plan that will include training program and also aims to increase bilateral trainings.

Those are only some of initiatives that we would like to push for, but I would like to end these words saying that we are very committed and not only concerned with the natural disasters that have played an important roles in this area of the world, and we are fully committed to work with you and contribute to mitigate the impact and the effects and to prepare ourselves to be more resilient in the future in order to be able to face theses natural disasters in a better way.

That’s why I would like to express my deepest thanks for your invitation and commit my strongest effort to be able to work together in order to improve the quality of life of our citizen.

Thank you very much.

*****

Well, thank you very much.
 
We have had a lot of bilateral meetings with many of the ministers and heads of states of this Caribbean Community, and I would like only to thanks your attitude, your openness and also the great and wonderful hospitality of Jamaica, which it is not a surprise for us, but we also, we always appreciate it very much.
 
And to emphasize the highlights what I think that we can strength our cooperation. 
 
The first one is multidimensional approaches to the poverty and quality of education in early stages, that’s an area where we have been working for many, many years, and we would like to share those experiences and learn from your experiences.
 
The second line is search and rescue missions in urban areas, which is again, given our nature, our geography, something that we are facing almost every day. 
 
The third area is environmental and climate change, which is affecting all our countries, and probably, it continues in much more intensive way, and therefore that third area, which is very interest for us, and I hope for some of the countries of the Caribbean Community. 
 
The fourth one is natural disasters, and here we would like to be helped, especially in terms of recovering in an emergency way the infrastructure that is damaged by hurricanes and other natural disasters. That is a support area what we can collaborate.
 
And the fifth aspect that I would like to address that is we are really interested and ready to go forward in starting the negotiations for the Free Trade Agreement with CARICOM, that is something that we have been working on and I think that it will be mutual benefits to move forward in that area. 
 
So, I only have to thank you for your openness and your reception, and of course, once again, thanks Jamaica for this wonderful hospitality.
 
Thanks all.
 
 
(Traducción)
 
 
En primer lugar, decir que es un gran honor para mí estar aquí y quiero agradecerles por invitarme a esta Cumbre de la Comunidad del Caribe, y esto también es muy especial porque es la primera vez en esto en mi segundo mandato como Presidente de Chile.
 
La integración regional es una de nuestras principales políticas e intereses exteriores, y estoy plenamente convencido de que también es un objetivo que asumimos con la CARICOM, porque hemos desempeñado un papel clave en impulsar esta integración, y estamos seguros de que la integración y la cooperación progresivas, especialmente en esta época donde el libre comercio está en apuros y el proteccionismo es un sentimiento en muchas áreas diferentes, el proteger y defender la integración y el libre comercio es algo en lo que trabajaremos para los mejores beneficios tanto para los países de CARICOM como todos los países del mundo.
 
Mi presencia aquí también refleja las relaciones de larga data de Chile y CARICOM, que se establecieron con la firma del Acuerdo de Cooperación Técnica-científica en 1996, como ustedes recordaban, que dio forma a nuestra cooperación.
 
Esto es algo que necesitamos impulsar y fortalecer, porque funcionará en función de los mejores intereses de CARICOM y Chile, y el hecho de que Chile sea parte de la Alianza del Pacífico, de alguna forma, es una oportunidad para fortalecer los lazos entre la Alianza del Pacífico y la Comunidad de CARICOM.
 
CARICOM y Chile comparten un deseo común de promoción y, por supuesto, cooperación política, comercial, económica, científica, técnica y cultural, para fortalecer las relaciones y mejorar la calidad de vida de nuestros ciudadanos.
 
De esto hay bastante evidencia a nivel multilateral, donde tanto CARICOM como nuestro país comparten el deseo de fortalecer el sistema multilateral y preservar la estabilidad global, basada en el respeto al derecho internacional. Ese principio nos permite trabajar hacia un gran entendimiento para mejorar la integración regional.
 
La presencia de Chile en el Caribe ha sido fortalecida en los últimos años. Hemos abierto embajadas en Jamaica, Trinidad y Tobago y más recientemente en Guyana, sede de la Secretaría General de la Comunidad del Caribe, CARICOM. Y estas embajadas tienen presencias en muchos otros países de esta región.
 
Y por esta razón, creemos que la importancia y el futuro de CARICOM como instrumento de paz, estabilidad y desarrollo es absolutamente clave. Estar aquí hoy, en esta reunión, es una clara muestra del interés de Chile en trabajar juntos y unir esfuerzos en el apoyo a CARICOM en el camino a seguir.
 
Queremos seguir trabajando junto a usted en este intento de alcanzar estas metas y objetivos, y en promover la integración económica regional. Creemos que, haciéndolo de esta forma, crearemos un entorno para la promoción de la paz y la seguridad regional e internacional, que comparten la Comunidad del Caribe y mi país.
 
En este compromiso a largo plazo, establecimos en 2015 un programa de cooperación y al estar aquí, estamos firmes en el compromiso de Chile de seguir impulsando ese programa de cooperación y fortalecer ese programa para alcanzar objetivos más importantes y más ambiciosos.
 
El programa está estructurado con diferentes estrategias, combinando un enfoque de implementación regional, que incluye a todos los países de ingreso y un enfoque bilateral, teniendo en cuenta los requisitos particulares de cada país.
 
Tiene dos componentes básicos: transferencias técnicas y capacitación de recursos humanos e incluye cuatro áreas temáticas: desarrollo social, agricultura y seguridad alimentaria, prevención de desastres, donde como dijeron ustedes, tenemos una larga, larga historia y experiencia y, por lo tanto, creo que podemos aprender mucho el uno del otro sobre cómo abordar esta nueva tendencia que tenemos que enfrentar, particularmente lo que sucedió el año pasado en esta área con la temporada de huracanes, que fue probablemente la peor en la historia de esta área.
 
Una de estas estrategias ha implementado el componente de transferencia técnica, que actualmente ejecuta alrededor de cien iniciativas con países del Caribe.
 
El objetivo es compartir experiencias con los funcionarios públicos para la creación de políticas poderosas, ya hemos incorporado gradualmente nuevos actores, de la sociedad civil y la academia. Los fondos chilenos tienen una línea para financiar esta iniciativa social.
 
Nuestro deseo es llevar nuestros esfuerzos a nuestro compromiso con CARICOM. Es por eso que a Chile le gustaría trabajar con la Secretaría y sus asesores técnicos e instituciones, para realizar una evaluación de nuestra cooperación y actividad, implementado hoy, para poder hacer lo que realmente se necesita para mejorar y reorientar ese programa de colaboración.
 
Este sería el primer paso en nuestro trabajo conjunto para nuestra III Comisión Conjunta CARICOM-Chile, y el lanzamiento de una nueva agenda de cooperación basada en programas en áreas específicas, que hemos discutido esta mañana en reuniones bilaterales con muchos Primeros Ministros de países, que pertenecen a la Comunidad CARICOM.
 
En ese sentido, nuestras reuniones con la Secretaría y las instituciones de CARICOM, será de gran ayuda para poder seguir avanzando en esta área.
 
Respecto a otros temas que, por supuesto, siguen estando en nuestra agenda de cooperación, desastres ambientales y de la naturaleza. Esta mañana hemos conversado con muchas de las islas orientales de esta Comunidad, sobre lo que se podría ayudar, dado que estamos esperando para esta nueva temporada de huracanes. Particularmente, el transporte y también los equipos de reparación de infraestructura son probablemente una de las cosas que serán más necesarias en esta temporada, y estamos trabajando para ayudar más en esa área.
 
También enfrentamos los efectos negativos del cambio climático. Somos plenamente conscientes de que ustedes tienen muy poca responsabilidad sobre lo que está sucediendo con el cambio climático en el mundo. Desafortunadamente, ustedes están sacando una gran parte del daño y las consecuencias del cambio climático. Y eso es algo que llama a la solidaridad de todos los países, porque éste es un problema mundial, y en consecuencia debemos enfrentarlo de manera muy solidaria.
 
Por esa razón, las erupciones volcánicas en nuestras posiciones marinas y antárticas nos han enseñado sobre la naturaleza de los desastres naturales y cómo enfrentarlos de la mejor manera posible.
 
Y nos gustaría, por supuesto, ser parte del esfuerzo de la Comunidad CARICOM: tenemos que enfrentarlo en esta temporada y en el futuro.
 
Desde ese punto de vista, ése es también el motivo por el que lanzamos la Segunda Declaración "Because the Ocean", que hizo un llamado a todos los gobiernos a incluir los océanos en las Contribuciones Nacionales Determinadas, y me gustaría invitar a los países de la CARICOM a participar en esta importante iniciativa que será o podría ser una gran ayuda para enfrentar los desafíos del futuro.
 
También somos conscientes de lo difícil que es para algunos países insulares pequeños y países de medio ingreso, especialmente en este tema, por lo tanto, aspiramos a que el programa de cooperación contribuya con cierta ayuda en términos de recursos financieros para poder mitigar o anticiparse a parte de este problema.
 
La contribución puede ser administrada por los fondos de capital del OCS (Organización de Estados del Caribe Oriental) e incluirá muchas áreas diferentes que se han estado hablando en nuestra discusión con los diferentes países que pertenecen al CARICOM.
 
Ahora me gustaría hablar de un tema diferente. Tenemos una preocupación común por el impacto del desarrollo económico actual a nivel internacional, por los efectos negativos de la permanente crisis del mercado financiero y por la enorme repercusión en los países de ingreso medio y pequeño.
 
Es por eso que ésta es otra razón por la que debemos unir nuestros esfuerzos para poder enfrentar los nuevos retos de una mejor manera.
 
Por otro lado, la aparición del proteccionismo y la llamada antiglobalización son desafíos actuales para el comercio, pero es la razón por la que no tenemos que enfrentarlo solos.
 
Chile tiene una historia de ser una economía muy abierta, y creemos firmemente que el libre comercio es la mejor manera de lograr el desarrollo, al menos para un país como Chile.
 
Una señal de esto es que hasta ahora tenemos Acuerdos de Libre Comercio con más de setenta países en el mundo, y nos gustaría poder comenzar las negociaciones para tener un Acuerdo de Libre Comercio con CARICOM, que es algo que hemos estado esperando por un largo período de tiempo.
 
Una señal de nuestra lucha contra el proteccionismo es que en marzo firmamos el acuerdo integral y progresivo para la Asociación Transpacífica, que creará el Acuerdo de Libre Comercio, la zona de libre comercio de Asia a América, cruzando el Océano Pacífico.

Y otro ejemplo de nuestro trabajo es la Alianza del Pacífico, en que hemos iniciado un compromiso que está absolutamente listo para trabajar y establecer vínculos más estrechos con la CARICOM.

Volviendo a CARICOM, con el objetivo de desarrollar capacidades en el área de políticas comerciales y promoción comercial, y en el marco del Memorando de Entendimiento entre ProChile y Jampro, ambos países organizarán un plan anual que incluirá un programa de capacitación y también tiene el objetivo de aumentar las capacitaciones bilaterales.

Esas son sólo algunas de las iniciativas que nos gustaría impulsar, pero me gustaría terminar estas palabras diciendo que estamos muy comprometidos y no sólo preocupados por los desastres naturales que han jugado un rol muy importante en esta área del mundo, y estamos totalmente comprometidos en trabajar con ustedes y contribuir a mitigar el impacto y los efectos y a prepararnos para ser más resilientes en el futuro, a fin de poder enfrentar estos desastres naturales de una mejor manera.

Es por eso que me gustaría expresar mi más profundo agradecimiento por su invitación y comprometer mi mayor esfuerzo para poder trabajar juntos con el fin de mejorar la calidad de vida de nuestros ciudadanos.

Muchas gracias.

*****

Bueno, muchas gracias.
 
Hemos tenido varias reuniones bilaterales con varios ministros y Jefes de Estado de esta CARICOM, y me gustaría sólo darles las gracias por su actitud, por su franqueza y también por la gran y maravillosa hospitalidad de Jamaica, la cual no es una sorpresa para nosotros, pero que también, siempre agradecemos.
 
Y enfatizar los puntos más importantes que creo podemos fortalecer en nuestra cooperación.
 
El primero tiene que ver con los enfoques multidimensionales respecto a la pobreza y la calidad de la educación en edad temprana. Ésa es un área donde hemos estado trabajando por varios, varios años, y nos gustaría compartir esas experiencias y aprender de sus experiencias.
 
La segunda línea son las misiones de búsqueda y rescate en áreas urbanas, que nuevamente, dada nuestra naturaleza, nuestra geografía, es algo a lo que nos enfrentamos casi todos los días.
 
La tercera área es el cambio climático y ambiental, que está afectando a todos nuestros países, y probablemente continúe de una manera mucho más intensa; y, por lo tanto, esa tercera área, que es muy interesante para nosotros y, espero, para algunos de los países de CARICOM.
 
La cuarta son los desastres naturales, y aquí nos gustaría recibir ayuda, especialmente en términos de recuperación, en una forma urgente, de la infraestructura dañada por huracanes y otros desastres naturales. Ésa es un área de apoyo en la que podemos colaborar.
 
Y el quinto aspecto que me gustaría abordar es que estamos realmente interesados y listos para avanzar en el inicio de las negociaciones para el Acuerdo de Libre Comercio con CARICOM. Eso es algo en lo que hemos estado trabajando, y creo que será de mutuo beneficio avanzar en esa área.
 
Por lo tanto, sólo me queda agradecerles por su actitud abierta y recepción, y por supuesto, una vez más, gracias a Jamaica por esta maravillosa hospitalidad.
 
Gracias a todos.
 